How Emotions are Made
--------------------

Modern science has an account that fits this story, which I call the
classical view of emotion. According to this view, the waver in Governor
Malloy’s voice launched a chain reaction that began in my brain. A
particular set of neurons—call it the “sadness circuit”—leaped into action
and caused my face and body to respond in a certain, specific way
--------------------

. Emotions are real, but not in the objective
sense that molecules or neurons are real. They are real in the same sense
that money is real—that is, hardly an illusion, but a product of human
agreement.5
--------------------

 the theory of constructed emotion,
--------------------

Using bits and pieces of past
experience, such as my knowledge of shootings and my previous sadness
about them, my brain rapidly predicted what my body should do to cope
with such tragedy. Its predictions caused my thumping heart, my flushed
face, and the knots in my stomach
--------------------

A more objective technique, called facial
electromyography (EMG), removes human perceivers altogether. Facial
EMG places electrodes on the surface of the skin to detect the electrical
signals that make facial muscles move.
--------------------

 “Fear” does not have a single expression but a diverse
population of facial movements that vary from one situation to the next.*
(Think about it: When is the last time an actor won an Academy Award for
pouting when sad?)
--------------------

However, women’s feelings of arousal were more strongly linked to
the anterior insula, while men’s were more strongly linked to visual cortex.
This is evidence that the same experience—feelings of arousal—was
associated with different patterns of neural activity, an example of
degeneracy
--------------------

Simulations are your brain’s guesses of what’s happening in the world. In
every waking moment, you’re faced with ambiguous, noisy information
from your eyes, ears, nose, and other sensory organs. Your brain uses your
past experiences to construct a hypothesis—the simulation—and compares
it to the cacophony arriving from your senses. 
--------------------

Your bee-related simulations are rooted in your mental concept of what a
“Bee” is. This concept not only includes information about the bee itself
(what it looks and sounds like, how you act on it, what changes in your
autonomic nervous system allow your action, etc.), but also information
contained in other concepts related to bees (“Meadow,” “Flower,” “Honey,”
“Sting,” “Pain,” etc.). A
--------------------

These purely physical sensations inside your body have no objective
psychological meaning. Once your concepts enter the picture, however,
those sensations may take on additional meaning. If you feel an ache in
your stomach while sitting at the dinner table, you might experience it as
hunger. If flu season is just around the corner, you might experience that
same ache as nausea.
--------------------

Back when I was in graduate school, a guy in my psychology program
asked me out on a date. I didn’t know him very well and was reluctant to go
because, honestly, I wasn’t particularly attracted to him, but I had been
cooped up too long in the lab that day, so I agreed. As we sat together in a
coffee shop, to my surprise, I felt my face flush several times as we spoke.
My stomach fluttered and I started having trouble concentrating. Okay, I
realized, I was wrong. I am clearly attracted to him.
--------------------

An emotion is your brain’s creation of what your bodily
sensations mean, in relation to what is going on around you in the world.
--------------------

My experience in the coffee shop, where I felt attraction when I had the
flu, would be called an error or misattribution in the classical view, but it’s
no more a mistake than seeing a bee in a bunch of blobs. An influenza virus
in my blood contributed to fever and flushing, and my brain made meaning
from the sensations in the context of a lunch date, constructing a genuine
feeling of attraction, in the normal way that the brain constructs any other
mental state.
--------------------

Emotions are not reactions to the world. You are not a passive receiver of
sensory input but an active constructor of your emotions. From sensory
input and past experience, your brain constructs meaning and prescribes
action. 
--------------------

One instance of anger need not look or feel like another, nor
will it be caused by the same neurons. Variation is the norm.
--------------------

One flavor, called social construction, studies the
role of social values and interests in determining how we perceive and act
in the world
--------------------

An emotion word such as “anger,” therefore, names a population of
diverse instances, each one constructed to best guide action in the
immediate circumstance. 
--------------------

In the theory of constructed emotion, variation is the
norm. When you are angry, you might scowl, frown mildly or severely,
shout, laugh, or even stand in eerie calmness, depending on what works best
in the situation
--------------------

Fear is not a bodily pattern—just as bread is not flour—
but emerges from the interactions of core systems. An instance of fear has
irreducible, emergent properties not found in the ingredients alone, such as
unpleasantness (as your car skids out of control on a slippery highway) or
pleasantness (on an undulating rollercoaster).
--------------------

 I refer to fear, anger, happiness, sadness, and so
on, in general as emotion categories, because each word names a population
of diverse instances,
--------------------

In the construction mindset, I speak of perceiving an instance of emotion.
Perception is a complex mental process that does not imply a neural
fingerprint behind the emotion, merely that an instance of emotion occurred
somehow.
--------------------

I also do not speak of perceiving someone’s emotion “accurately.”
Instances of emotion have no objective fingerprints in the face, body, and
brain, so “accuracy” has no scientific meaning. It has a social meaning—we
certainly can ask whether two people agree in their perceptions of emotion,
or whether a perception is consistent with some norm. But perceptions exist
within the perceiver.
--------------------

Likewise, test subjects who see a list of
emotion words are primed with (i.e., they simulate) the corresponding
emotion concepts to categorize the posed faces they see. Your knowledge of
concepts is a key ingredient for experiencing other people as emotional, and
emotion words invoke this ingredient
--------------------

Simple pleasant and unpleasant feelings come from an ongoing process
inside you called interoception. Interoception is your brain’s representation
of all sensations from your internal organs and tissues, the hormones in
your blood, and your immune system.
--------------------

Through prediction and correction, your brain continually creates and
revises your mental model of the world. It’s a huge, ongoing simulation that
constructs everything you perceive while determining how you act. But
predictions aren’t always correct, when compared to actual sensory input,
and the brain must make adjustments.
--------------------

The same process happens when you mistake a stranger’s face for
someone you know, or step off a moving walkway in an airport and feel
surprised by the change in your pace. Your brain computes prediction errors
speedily by comparing the prediction to actual sensory input, and then it
reduces the prediction error quickly and efficiently
--------------------

 In a sense, your brain is wired for delusion:
through continual prediction, you experience a world of your own creation
that is held in check by the sensory world. Once your predictions are correct
enough, they not only create your perception and action but also explain the
meaning of your sensations.
--------------------

A single
interoceptive cue, such as a dull ache in your abdomen, could mean a
stomachache, hunger, tension, an overly tight belt, or a hundred other
causes. Your brain must explain bodily sensations to make them
meaningful, and its major tool for doing so is prediction
--------------------

Whenever your brain predicts a movement, whether it’s getting out of
bed in the morning or taking a sip of coffee, your body-budgeting regions
adjust your budget. When your brain predicts that your body will need a
quick burst of energy,
--------------------

Every person you encounter, every prediction you make, every idea you
imagine, and every sight, sound, taste, touch, and smell that you fail to
anticipate all have budgetary consequences and corresponding interoceptive
predictions.
--------------------

Affect is the general sense of feeling that you experience throughout each
day. It is not emotion but a much simpler feeling with two features. The
first is how pleasant or unpleasant you feel, which scientists call valence.
The pleasantness of the sun on your skin, the deliciousness of your favorite
food, and the discomfort of a stomachache or a pinch are all examples of
affective valence
--------------------

The second feature of affect is how calm or agitated you
feel, which is called arousal. The energized feeling of anticipating good
news, the jittery feeling after drinking too much coffee, the fatigue after a
long run, and the weariness from lack of sleep are examples of high and low
arousal
--------------------

And when your brain represents interoceptive changes, you
experience pleasantness and unpleasantness, and agitation and calmness.
--------------------

Let’s be clear on one thing: interoception is not a mechanism dedicated to
manufacturing affect. Interoception is a fundamental feature of the human
nervous system, and why you experience these sensations as affect is one of
the great mysteries of science.
--------------------

Interoception did not evolve for you to have
feelings but to regulate your body budget. It helps your brain track your
temperature, how much glucose you are using, whether you have any tissue
damage, whether your heart is pounding, whether your muscles are
stretching, and other bodily conditions, all at the same time
--------------------

Your affective
feelings of pleasure and displeasure, and calmness and agitation, are simple
summaries of your budgetary state
--------------------

The phrase “an
unpleasant image” is really shorthand for “an image that impacts my body
budget, producing sensations that I experience as unpleasant.” 
--------------------

 In these
moments of affective realism, we experience affect as a property of an
object or event in the outside world, rather than as our own experience.
--------------------

The thing is, a bad feeling doesn’t always mean something is wrong. It
just means you’re taxing your body budget.
--------------------

Your body-budgeting regions keep
predicting adjustments to your budget long after the predicted need is over.
You therefore may take a long time to calm down, even if you know there is
nothing wrong. Remember when I compared your brain to a scientist who
makes and tests hypotheses? Your body-budgeting regions are like a mostly
deaf scientist: they make predictions but have a hard time listening to the
incoming evidence
--------------------

Without concepts, you’d experience a world of ever-fluctuating noise.
Everything you ever encountered would be unlike everything else. You’d be
experientially blind, like when you first saw the blobby picture in chapter 2,
but permanently so. You’d be incapable of learning
--------------------

Thus, concepts aren’t fixed definitions in your brain, and they’re not
prototypes of the most typical or frequent instances. Instead, your brain has
many instances—of cars, of dot patterns, of sadness, or anything else—and
it imposes similarities between them, in the moment, according to your goal
in a given situation. 
--------------------

Goal-based concepts are super flexible and adaptable to the situation. If
you’re in a pet shop to replenish your home aquarium and the salesperson
asks, “What kind of fish would you like?” you might say “a goldfish” or “a
black molly” but probably not “a poached salmon.” Your concept “Fish” in
this situation serves a goal to purchase a pet, not to order dinner, so you’ll
construct instances of the concept “Fish” that best suit your fish tank
--------------------

To see the real power of goal-based concepts, consider a purely mental
concept such as “Things That Can Protect You from Stinging Insects.”
Instances of the category are remarkably diverse: a flyswatter, a beekeeper’s
suit, a house, a Maserati, a large trash can, a vacation in Antarctica, a calm
demeanor, even a university degree in entomology. They share no
perceptual features. This category is clearly and entirely a construction of
the human mind
--------------------

So, what’s happening in your brain when you categorize? You are not
finding similarities in the world but creating them. When your brain needs a
concept, it constructs one on the fly, mixing and matching from a
population of instances from your past experience, to best fit your goals in a
particular situation.
--------------------

Emotion concepts are goal-based concepts. Instances of happiness, for
example, are highly variable. You can smile in happiness, sob in happiness,
scream in happiness, raise your arms in happiness, clench your fists in
happiness, jump up and down doling out high fives in happiness, or even be
stunned motionless in happiness. Your eyes might be wide or narrowed;
your breathing rapid or slow. You can have the heart-pounding, exciting
happiness of winning the lottery or the calm, relaxed happiness of lying on
a picnic blanket with your lover. You’ve also perceived many other people
as happy in various ways. Altogether, this motley assortment of experiences
and perceptions can involve different actions and inner-body changes, they
may feel affectively different, and they can include different sights, sounds,
and smells. To you, in the moment, however, these sets of physical changes
are equivalent for some goal. Perhaps your goal is to feel accepted, to feel
pleasure, to achieve an ambition, or to find meaning in life. Your concept of
“Happiness” in the moment is centered on such a goal, binding together the
diverse instances from your past.
--------------------

 We transform sensory
inputs from the body and the world, which are perceiver-independent, into
an instance of (say) happiness in the context of a concept, “Happiness,”
found in many human minds. The concept imposes new functions on these
sensations, creating reality where there was none before: an experience or
perception of emotion
--------------------

First, you need a group of people to agree
that a concept exists, such as “Flower” or “Cash” or “Happiness.” This
shared knowledge is called collective intentionality. Most people barely
think about collective intentionality, but it nevertheless is a foundation of
every society. Even your own name is made real through collective
intentionality.
--------------------

 instances of a single emotion concept, like
“Surprise,” need no physical similarity for your brain to group them
together. And any two emotion concepts, like “Surprise” and “Fear,” need
no consistent fingerprints to reliably distinguish them. So we, as a culture,
introduce mental similarity using words. From childhood we hear people
say “fear” and “surprise” in particular contexts.
--------------------

Love (or
curiosity, hunger, etc.) is an emotion as long as people agree that its
instances serve the functions of an emotion.
--------------------

The first stems from the fact that emotion concepts, like all concepts, make
meaning. Different categorizations represent different meanings: that is, different likely explanations for your physical state in this situation, based on your past experience. Once you’ve made an instance of emotion, by categorizing with an emotion concept, your sensations and actions are explained.
--------------------

The second function of emotions stems from the fact that concepts
prescribe action: An instance of emotion, constructed from a prediction, tailors your action to meet a particular goal in a particular situation, using past experience as a guide.
--------------------

The third function is related to a concept’s ability to regulate your body
budget. Depending how you categorize your sweating, panting state, your
body budget may be affected differently. A categorization of excitement
might lead to a moderate release of cortisol (say, to raise your arms); a
categorization of fear might lead to a greater release of cortisol (as you
prepare to run away);
--------------------

But emotion
concepts have two other functions that draw other individuals into your
circle of social reality. One function is emotion communication, in which
two people categorize with concepts in synchrony
If you see a man taking quick breaths and sweating, it communicates one thing if he’s wearing a jogging suit and something else entirely if he’s wearing a groom’s tuxedo. Categorization here communicates meaning and explains why the man acts as he does.
--------------------

The other function is social influence. Concepts like
“Excitement,” “Fear,” and “Exhaustion” are tools for you to regulate other
people’s body budgets, not just your own. If you can get someone else to
perceive your panting, sweaty state as fear, you influence their actions in a
way that mere quick breaths and damp brows cannot achieve on their own.
You can be an architect of other people’s experiences.
--------------------

Imagine the feeling of reaching into a bag of potato chips and discovering
that the previous chip you ate was the last one. You feel disappointed that
the bag is empty, relieved that you won’t be ingesting any more calories,
slightly guilty that you ate the entire bag, and yet hungry for another chip. I
have just invented an emotion concept, and there is surely no word for it in
the English language. You experienced this emotion without a word for it.
--------------------

Your brain accomplished this feat by combining instances of concepts
you already know, such as “Bag,” “Chips,” “Disappointment,” “Relief,”
“Guilt,” and “Hunger.” This powerful ability of your brain’s conceptual
system, which we called conceptual combination
--------------------

you need
an emotion concept in order to experience or perceive the associated
emotion. 
--------------------

“Happiness” and
“Sadness” are each populations of diverse instances. Therefore, emotional
intelligence (EI) is about getting your brain to construct the most useful
instance of the most useful emotion concept in a given situation. (
--------------------

Emotions are not temporary deviations from rationality. They are not
alien forces that invade you without your consent. They are not tsunamis
that leave destruction in their wake. They are not even your reactions to the
world. They are your constructions of the world. Instances of emotion are
no more out of control than thoughts or perceptions or beliefs or memories.
The fact is, you construct many perceptions and experiences and you
perform many actions, some that you control a lot and some that you don’t.
--------------------

The human brain is a high-complexity system because, within one
physical structure, it can reconfigure its billions of neurons to construct a
huge repertoire of experiences, perceptions, and behaviors. 
--------------------

Complexity implies that the wiring diagram of a brain is not a set of
instructions for a single kind of mind with universal mental organs. But the
human brain has few preset mental concepts, such as perhaps pleasantness
and unpleasantness (valence), agitation and calmness (arousal), loudness
and softness, brightness and darkness, and other properties of
consciousness. Instead, variation is the norm.
--------------------

 Body-budget predictions laden
with affect, not logic and reason, are the main drivers of your experience
and behavior. We all think a food “is delicious” as if the flavor were
embedded in the food, when flavor is a construction and the deliciousness is
our own affect
--------------------

Many psychologists, for example, do not realize that every psychological
concept is social reality. We debate the differences between “will power”
and “tenacity” and “grit” as if they were each distinct in nature, rather than
constructions shared through collective intentionality
--------------------

We are
a bunch of brains regulating each other’s body budgets, building concepts
and social reality together, and thereby helping to construct each other’s
minds and determine each other’s outcomes
--------------------

You are also somewhat responsible to others, not only the less
fortunate but also future generations, for how you influence their wiring.